Writing Functions
=================

Introduction
------------

You can define your **own function** in R. This is particularly useful if you want to perform the same task with many different data sets. Your definition requires you to declare your function’s arguments and whether they have a set default value or not. Arguments cannot by default be forced to a certain mode or class, but you can check for them in the function an coerce them if necessary. Variables within your function are limited to only that function, and after it has run will simply disappear. If you want to store a result from a function, you must **return** it to the main program. 

Defining a basic function
-------------------------

Functions always have the same structure: 

.. code-block:: R 

  function_name <- function(argument, argument = default value) {
        statement or operations
        return(result)
  }


You need to define a **name** for your function that you will later use to call it with. The *curly brackets* define where the function starts and ends. The *return* command returns the result back to the main program. Let's have a look at a first example. We would like to write a function that converts temperature Fahrenheit to Celsius. 

.. code-block:: R

  # defining function 
  f_to_c <- function(temp_F) {          #define a function and argument temp_F, no default arguments
    temp_C <- (temp_F - 32) * 5 / 9     #perform calculations using the argument 
    return(temp_C)                      #return the result to the main program
  }
  
  # using the function                   
  f_to_c(70) # = 21.1                   #using the name of the function to call it


The next function decrypts numbers into letters. We define two arguments: the necessary argument x and the optional argument offset which is set to 0 by default. 

.. code-block:: R

  # defining a function
  caesarDecrypt <- function(x,offset=0){
    new_x = x - offset - 1                  # Remove the offset and minus 1 for the next line
    new_x = new_x%%26 + 1                   # Find the modulo, add 1 to move from 0:25 to 1:26
    string = letters[new_x]                 # Translate numbers to letters
    return(string)                          # Return the answer
  }
  # Using it
  x <- c(3,8,18,9,19)
  caesarDecrypt(x)
  x <- c(7,14,20,17,20,12,4)
  caesarDecrypt(x, offset = 12)

  
You can create functions as complex as you like. For example, we can include an if statement or for loops. This next function only multiplies by 3 the input if it is an even number.


.. code-block:: R

  #multiply all even number by a certain factor 
  OnlyIfEven <- function(number, factor = 3){             #define function. mulitplication factor is set to 3 by default
    temp_res <- number %% 2                               #calculate modulo 
    if (temp_res == 0){                                   #if modulo is zero then the number is even
    res <- number*factor                                  #mulitplication
    print(res)                                            #print result. Careful, this does not return the result!
    }
    else{print("error: expected even number")              #print error message if modulo not zero     
  }

  #using the function
  OnlyIfEven(4) #=12
  OnlyIfEven(5) #error: expected even number

  
Organising Functions 
--------------------
  
If you need to write many different functions for your data set it is recommended to keep them saved in separate files. This keeps your scripts nice and tidy. You can always call another file in your current script by using the **source** command. 

.. code-block:: R

  source("path_to_your_file/filename.R")
  
  
Exercises
---------

* Write a function to add up all numbers in a vector except for the highest
* Write a function that deciphers letters into numbers. (hint: use the **which** function)

.. hidden-code-block:: R

  # add up all numbers in a vector except for the highest
  SumWithoutMax <- function(input_vector){            #defining function
    sum_v <- sum(input_vector)                        #sum over whole vector
    max_v <- max(input_vector)                        #determine max value
    sum_final <- sum_v - max_v                        #subtract
    return(sum_final)
  }
  #using it
  v <- c(1:10)
  SumWithoutMax(v) #=45
  
  #deciphers letters into numbers
  caesarCrypt <- function(x, offset = 0){
    res <- c()                                      #define empty result vector for numbers             
    for (character in x){                           #for loop for each character in argument
      num <- which(letters == character)            #find index for that character
      num_off <- num - offset                       #correct for offset
      res <- c(res, num_off)                        #add to current result to result vector
    }
    return(res)       
  }  

.. container:: nextlink

    `Next: Loading and installing packages  <5.1_Packages.html>`_

