
Session 1.6. Introduction to R with RStudio
===========================================

Index:
------


* Working directory
* Basic functions for vectors
* Combine vectors and create matrices
* Types of data within R
* Types of objects within R
* Select data
* Factors

Working directory
-----------------

Where are we? The ``getwd()`` function gives us our current working directory:

.. code-block:: R

   getwd()

We can change the current working directory by 'File/Change working directory' or with the ``setwd()``\ :

.. code-block:: R

   setwd("S:\home\biolcourse-XX")

With ``list.files()`` or ``dir()`` function we list the files present in the working directory:

.. code-block:: R

   list.files()
   dir()

Basic functions for vectors
---------------------------

The most basic function within R probably is the ``c()`` function. It combines values into a vector.Let's create a vector by combining 4 numeric values:

.. code-block:: R

   c(1,3,7,24)

We do the same but store the result in an object called **x**\ :

.. code-block:: R

   x<-c(1,3,7,24)
   x

We can also combine text. Text always goes quoted:

.. code-block:: R

   y<-c("a","b","c","d")
   y

Both **x** and **y** vectors are stored in the RAM memory. We can list all the objects in the memory with the ``ls()`` function:

.. code-block:: R

   ls()

We can remove objects from the memory. Let's remove the **y** object:

.. code-block:: R

   rm(y)
   ls()

We can also enter numeric sequences. We can do it in three ways:

.. code-block:: R

   1:5
   c(1,2,3,4,5)
   seq(1,5)

How can we know how the ``seq()`` works? The help page for a function can be accessed throuh ``?funcion_name``\ :

.. code-block:: R

   ?seq

Let's exploit the ``by`` and ``length.out`` parameters:

.. code-block:: R

   seq(1,20)
   seq(1,20,by=2)
   seq(1,20,length.out=40)

We can combine functions. For example ``c()`` and ``seq()``\ :

.. code-block:: R

   c(1,seq(4,10),12)

Something less abstract: lets introduce the age of some of us:

.. code-block:: R

   ages<-c(18,25,22,23,21,19)
   ages

Vector can have names for each value they contain. Lets set the vector's names:

.. code-block:: R

   names(ages)
   names(ages)<-c("Albert","Andrea","Ines","Rolf","Sylvia","Student X")
   ages

We can get the mean, standard deviation and other metrics:

.. code-block:: R

   sum(ages) # sum
   mean(ages) # mean
   sd(ages) # standard deviation
   min(ages) # minimum
   max(ages) # maximum
   range(ages) # range
   length(ages) # longitude
   sort(ages) # sort values
   sort(ages,decreasing=T) # sort decreasing

We can store these metrics as objects and concatenate them with ``c()``\ :

.. code-block:: R

   mean.ages<-mean(ages)
   mean.ages
   ls()

   summary.ages<-c(mean(ages),sd(ages),min(ages),max(ages),length(ages))
   names(summary.ages)<-c("Mean","sd","minimum","maximum","Nº obs.")
   summary.ages

What if there are unknown values?

.. code-block:: R

   ages<-c(18,25,22,23,21,19,NA)
   ages
   names(ages)
   names(ages)<-c("Albert","Andrea","Ines","Rolf","Sylvia","Student X")

We compute the mean again:

.. code-block:: R

   mean(ages)

Well, something is wrong. Let's ask for help:

.. code-block:: R

   ?mean

The ``mean()`` has a parameter that controls the treatment of *NAs*.

.. code-block:: R

   mean(ages)
   mean(ages,na.rm=F)
   mean(ages,na.rm=T)

Generally, it is recommended to use NAs when we have unknown values. However we can get rid of them, what may be useful for some analyses:

.. code-block:: R

   ages<-na.exclude(ages)
   ages

Combine vectors and create matrices
-----------------------------------

Now we create an object with some height values:

.. code-block:: R

   heigths<-c(1.75,1.80,1.63,1.82,2.00,1.72)
   names(heigths)<-names(ages)
   heigths

Combine ages and heights with ``cbind()`` or ``rbind()`` functions:

.. code-block:: R

   res<-rbind(ages,heigths)
   res
   res<-cbind(ages,heigths)
   res

How can we flip it?

.. code-block:: R

   t(res)

Now we are workin with a matrix (no a vector). Thus, new possibilities appear:

.. code-block:: R

   dim(res) # dimensions
   ncol(res) # no of columns
   nrow(res) #no of rows

   dimnames(res) # names
   rownames(res) # name of rows
   colnames(res) # name of columns

We can add the values by rows or columns:

.. code-block:: R

   colSums(res)
   rowSums(res)

Or we can apply any function by rows or by columns:

.. code-block:: R

   apply(res,2,sum) # identical to colSums()
   apply(res,1,sum) # identical rowSums()
   apply(res,2,mean)
   apply(res,2,sd)
   apply(res,2,min)
   apply(res,2,max)

Have can we create a matrix? With the ``matrix()`` function. A matrix, within R, is in fact a vector with a dimensions attribute. So to create a matrix we need to enter a vector and set the desired number of rows or columns. By default, the matrices are filled up by columns

We enter the same values:

.. code-block:: R

   res2<-matrix(c(18,25,22,23,21,19,1.75,1.80,1.63,1.82,2.00,1.72),ncol=2)

Now we set the names of both rows and columns:

.. code-block:: R

   colnames(res2)<-c("ages","heigths")
   rownames(res2)<-c("Albert","Andrea","Ines","Rolf","Sylvia","Student X")

   res
   res2

Types of data within R
----------------------

There exist 5 main data types in R (or *atomic classes*\ ):


* **Logical**\ : TRUE, FALSE
* **Numerical**\ : 1, 4.5, 122, etc.
* **Integer**\ : 1, 5, 122, etc.
* **Complex**\ : 1+0i, 2+4i, etc.
* **Character**\ : "a", "b", "hello", etc.

Let's create some different data types and explore how to detect the data type.

An integer vector:

.. code-block:: R

   v1<-seq(1,20)
   v1
   class(v1)

A numeric vector:

.. code-block:: R

   v2<-seq(1,20,by=0.5)
   v2
   class(v2)

A character vector:

.. code-block:: R

   v3<-c("a","b","c")
   v3
   class(v3)

A logical vector:

.. code-block:: R

   v4<-v1==5
   v4
   class(v4)

Types of objects within R
-------------------------

The most usual objects in R are of 5 types:

**Vectors**\ : the concatenation of one dimension of data of the same class.


* They are the minimal unit with which compose the rest of the objects.
* All the elements within it have to be of the same type.

**Factors**\ : used for representing categorical data. They may be understood as integer vectors for which each integer has a label associated.


* They may be ordered or not.
* They are key for most statistical tests.

**Matrices**\ : formally, a vector with two dimensions. In practice, a 2D array of data of the same type.

**Lists**\ : formally is a vector of elements of different class. That is, an object which is composed of objects.


* The results from statistical tests are usually lists.

**Data frames**\ : formally lists composed of objects with the same length.


* Apparently they are matrices, but they can contain objects of different class (numeric, characters, factors, etc.)
* They are the main object used for statistics within R: each file corresponds to an observational unit (sample, individual, etc.) and each column is a measured variable of these units.

Let's se some examples with a more realistic dataset.
We are going to use the **BP** dataset. This dataset contains information on the records of 100 adults from a small cross-sectional survey in 2001 investigating blood pressure and its determinants in a community. It is a data frame with 6 variables:


* **id**\ : identifier of each individual
* **sex**\ : male/female
* **sbp**\ : systolic blood pressure
* **dbp**\ : diastolic blood presuer
* **saltadd**\ : whether salt was added to diet
* **birthdate**\ : date of birth

.. code-block:: R

   load("S:\masterdata\BP.RData")

Let's explore it:

.. code-block:: R

   head(BP)
   dim(BP)
   BP[1:10,]

What kind of object is the BP dataset?

.. code-block:: R

   class(BP)

What kind of data are the first two variables of the dataset?

.. code-block:: R

   class(BP[,1])
   class(BP[,2])

We perform a regression between the **sbp** and **dbp** variables:

.. code-block:: R

   reg1<-lm(BP$sbp~BP$dbp)
   summary(reg1)

We save the result:

.. code-block:: R

   result<-summary(reg1)
   class(result)
   str(result)

Select Data
-----------

Vectors
^^^^^^^

Select by position:

.. code-block:: R

   heigths[1] # first value
   heigths[3] # third value
   heigths[1:3] # first to third value
   heigths[c(1,3)] # first and third value
   heigths[-3] # all values excepth the third
   heigths[-c(4,5)] # all except 4th and 5th

Selection by criteria:

.. code-block:: R

   good.values<-which(heigths>1.75)
   heigths[good.values]

   good.values<-which(heigths<1.90)
   heigths[good.values]

   good.values<-which(heigths==1.80)
   heigths[good.values]

   heigths[which(heigths==1.80)]

Matrices
^^^^^^^^

Select by position:

.. code-block:: R

   res[1,1] # first row, first column
   res[1,2] # first row, second column
   res[1,] # first row, all columns
   res[,2] # all raws, second column
   res[1:3,] # rows first to third, all columns
   res[c(1,2,4),] # rows 1, 2 and 4, all comuns
   res[-1,] # all except the first row

Selection by criteria:

.. code-block:: R

   good.values<-which(res[,1]>20)
   res[good.values,]

Data frames
^^^^^^^^^^^

The selection of data from data frames works as the matrices. However we can select the columns by name through ``data_frame$column_name``\ :

.. code-block:: R

   BP$sbp

Factors
-------

Let's create a factor from a character vector:

.. code-block:: R

   f1<-factor(c("T1","T1","T2","T2","T2"))
   f1

Let's create a factor from a numeric vector:

.. code-block:: R

   f2<-factor(c(1,1,2,2,2),label=c("T1","T2"))
   f2

There are factors that has a clear ordering:

.. code-block:: R

   f3<-factor(c("high","high", "medium","low", "low"))
   f3

How can we order it?

.. code-block:: R

   f3.ord<-factor(f3, levels=c(c("low","medium","high")), ordered=T)
   f3.ord

Change the name of levels:

.. code-block:: R

   levels(f3.ord)
   levels(f3.ord)<-c("h","m","l")
   f3.ord

Levels may be merged by changing properly their names:

.. code-block:: R

   levels(f3.ord)<-c("h","l","l")
   f3.ord

Create a dta frame with two factors:

.. code-block:: R

   gender<-factor(c("M","M","M","M","F","F","F","F"))
   employment<-factor(c("yes","yes","no","no","yes","yes","no","no"))

   gender
   employment

   some.data<-data.frame(gender,employment)
   some.data

Combine factors with ``interaction()``\ :

.. code-block:: R

   interaction(some.data$gender,some.data$employment)

A nicer separator:

.. code-block:: R

   interaction(some.data$gender,some.data$employment,sep=" - ")

Add it to the data frame:

.. code-block:: R

   some.data$merged<-interaction(some.data$gender,some.data$employment,sep=" - ")
   some.data

Further resources
-----------------

Manuals:


* `R for Beginners - Emmanuel Paradis <https://cran.r-project.org/doc/contrib/Paradis-rdebuts_en.pdf>`_
* `An Introduction to R <https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-intro.html>`_
* `R Data Import/Export <https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-data.html>`_

Cheat sheets:


* `Base R Cheat sheet <https://www.rstudio.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/r-cheat-sheet-3.pdf>`_
* `RStudio Cheat sheets <https://www.rstudio.com/resources/cheatsheets/>`_
