Calculation and Variables
=========================

Calculation and Variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

R as a calculator
-----------------

Using R at its most basic, it is a calculator. You can enter a calculation into the console and immediately evaluate the result.

.. code-block:: r

    # R is a calculator
    1 + 2
    3 * 4

Variables
---------

A core concept in programming, a **variable**, is essentially a named piece of data. That is, when you refer to the variable by its name within the program, you are actually referring to the data stored under that name.

To **assign** data to a variable in R, use the following syntax:

.. code-block:: r

    # Assignment of data to a variable
    x <- 2
    y <- 3.5

    # Alternative syntax
    x = 2
    y = 3.5

After you have assigned data to variables, you can then use the variables to perform calculations:

.. code-block:: r

    # R is a clever calculator
    x + 2
    x * y
    z <- x + x + x

If you need to see the value of a variable in the command line, you can just type its name:

.. code-block:: r

    # What is x?
    x

Note that variable names are case sensitive, and cannot start with a number.

Exercises
---------

* Experiment for yourself with the R command line to do some simple calculations.
* Assign some different numbers to the variables *x* and *y* and check if calculations with them work as you expect.
* Try to do a calculation with a variable you haven't assigned any data to, *a* for instance.
* Set *x* to 1, then check what happens when you run the calculation *x <- x + 1*, what value is *x* afterwards?
* Be aware that R has special values for certain calculations - try dividing by 0 for instance.

.. container:: nextlink

    `Next: Vectors, lists and data.frames in R <2.3_vectors.html>`_
