Packages
========

We've so far used a lot of fundamental functions in R, the sort without which you couldn't execute simple scripts at all. When performing data analysis however, there may well be better or more specific functions available for what you are trying to do. R is very flexible because it allows the loading of additional **packages** created by the user community to enhance and add functionality.

Loading a package
-----------------

To load a package, we use the **library** function. Once loaded, all of the functions inside the package become available to R. If a function should have the identical name to an existing function, it will mask the current version and refer instead to the version in the package, and give you a warning.

For the next example, first download the file "example.tree".

Download it in your Rstudio home by running the following command in the **Terminal tab** of your console panel:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    wget https://sunagawalab.ethz.ch/share/Bioinformatics_Spring21/_downloads/64c75b63e8336c3dc00a016c40dfcba1/example.tree

.. code-block:: r

    # For instance if we want to work with phylogenetic trees
    # If you look at the example.tree file itself you can see the format is non-intuitive
    library(ape)
    tree <- read.tree("example.tree")
    
    # Packages can load other packages and mask functions
    library(Hmisc)

Installing a package
--------------------

For native R packages, the **install.packages** function allows installation of new packages into a personal user library.

.. code-block:: r

    # Install a new package
    install.packages("beeswarm")

    # Load the package and demonstrate
    library(beeswarm)
    random_numbers <- rnorm(100)
    beeswarm(random_numbers)
    beeswarm(random_numbers,method="hex")

If the package has not been submitted to the standard R repositories, but exists for instance on github, the package **devtools** allows you to install it directly - you may have to install it yourself using the method above.

.. code-block:: r

    # Load devtools
    library(devtools)

    # Install a package from github
    install_github("https://github.com/Gibbsdavidl/CatterPlots")

    # Load the package and demonstrate
    library(CatterPlots)
    x <- rnorm(10)
    y <- rnorm(10)
    multicat(x,y)

Bioconductor
------------

**Bioconductor** is a popular repository making packages for bioinformatics, such as DESeq2 and Biostrings, available. Currently, there are about 2,000 packages available. Visit the website https://www.bioconductor.org/ and have a look!

In order to install these packages, you need to first install the **BiocManager** package.

Before starting the next example, download from Euler the file: /cluster/home/ssunagaw/teaching/ecoli/GCF_000482265.1_EC_K12_MG1655_Broad_SNP_genomic.fna to your local computer and rename it to: "EC_K12_MG1655_genomic.fna".

.. code-block:: r

    # First of all install the manager
    install.packages("BiocManager")

    # Use it directly without loading
    BiocManager::install("Biostrings")

    # Load the package and demonstrate
    library(Biostrings)
    cdss <- readDNAStringSet("EC_K12_MG1655_genomic.fna")
    subseq(cdss,1,10)
